---
layout: post
published: false
title: Delancey get what they want
---
## Elephantshopping centre planning application narrowly approved

Shopping centre owner and developer Delancey propoals for the shopping centre (link) narrowly secured approval from the planning committee last Tuesday (link SE1).  The approval is subject to Mayor Sadiq Khan endorsing the decision and the successful conclusion of S106 negotiations, to seal the legal contract between Southwark and Delancey for the delivery of the development.  A late application to Historic England for listing the shopping centre has also to be resolved.

## Winners and losers

Southwark's planning officer's were frank when presenting the merits of the proposed development - there were going to be positives and negatives (the negatives known as 'disbenefits').  In the positive column were a new Northern Line tube entrance, a new London College of Communication campus for University of the Arts London, new homes and new shops.  In the negative column was the displacement of the current traders and the unaffordability of the new homes and new shops for local people (or indeed for most people in Southwark).  It was for the committee to decide whether the balance lay and in the event it decided by a 4 to 3 vote, with one abstention, to approve the application.  In reaching this decision the committee accepted that the so-called mitigation measures, designed to minimise the harm to traders and other users, were sufficient to allow a vote in favour of the development.  The committee also set aside its own adopted housing policy which lays out clearly how much affordable housing is required, what type it should be and how much should be social rented.  Instead it chose to measure the affordable housing offer against a so-called 'emerging' policy, championed by Delancey and other developers, because it entails building less social rented housing (12% of total housing against 7.5% at the Elephant).  The affordable housing offer fails by this measure too, but was still approved, although it had too little London Living Rent (LLR) and too much affordable housing at 80% market rent, at nearly half total units.

## Housing policy Pick n' Mix

As a bonus Delancey have also obtained the option of a Build to Sell (BtS) scheme on the West site, while still retaining a Build to Rent (BtR) scheme as its main proposal.  This means the committee has approved a major application when it will not actually know what tenure of housing it will be getting for 498 homes, half the total number, until Delancey tells it.  Other complications arise because different housing policies apply, depending on the tenure, as well as different affordable housing requirements.  If the BtS scheme is chosen, then more social rented housing is needed (subject to viability). Council officers insisted that they were 'confident' that this additional social housing would be secured, because of their expertise in monitoring S106 agreements (not a confidence the Local Goverment Ombudsman shares (link)).

The BtR scheme has its own complications, one of which is ensuring that the proportion of LLR units are maintained, when Delancey wants to reassess eligibility for what it likes to call 'subsidised housing' at the end of every 3-year tenancy.  The number of units is already too low, (53 against about 150 units) and Southwark have proposed two equally impractical and almost incomprehensible [ways of  making sure they do not drop further](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/DhMTY3OWAAELO68.jpg).  The officers were not asked to explain why Southwark feels the need to contort itself this way and not simply tell  Delancey to comply with adopted policy and thus avoid these complications.  The committee does ask some questions on the practical effect on tenants of this recurrent means-testing, such as what happens if a tenant houshold income goes above £80,000 pa (answer: the rent doubles) and would you have to leave (yes, could happen).  Officer's again reassure the committee that they have confidence that they can reslove this affrodable housing dog's dinner in a consistent and flexible way and that it will all be resolved in S106 negotiations.

## Trader's suffering squared away


The committee decision to approve the application also tacitly accepts the reassurances of council officers that all that could be done to mitigate harm to the traders was being done. This was despite the traders objections that there was no relocation strategy in place, that the relocation fund was inadequate (£634,700 - an estimated average of about £6,000 per trader) and that their businesses were being ruined by Delancey's poor upkeep of the centre, as well as future uncertainty; traders have been told by Delancey they would have to  leave the centre by March 2019, regardless of the oucome of the planning application.  A trader's panel is now to be put in place to solve all these problems.  

Southwark is also content that it is fulfilling its public sector equality duty (ie that it has paid due regard to the harm the development will cause to ethnic minority and other groups), despite being warned  by Southwark Law Centre and Latin Elephant (links) that it has ignored other protected groups, such as women and the young.  Palaces' bingo and bowling has withdrawn its objection to the application, but council officers acknowledged that allowing a bingo operator first right of refusal for the use of some leisure space does not guarantee the bingo will return in the new development.  Nor does this right of refusal solve the problem of what bingo users do between the centre's demolition and completion of the new development.  Most of the bingo users from black and ethnic minority backgrounds.  The bowling alley, much used by young people, does not benefit from even the small protection given to the bingo.

## Profit vs cost 

The justifiction for accepting a proposal that drove a coach and horses through its housing policy and displaces the Latin American and ethnic community who have made the Elephant their social home was 'viability'.  Delancey told the committee that their estimated level of profit was at 'breaking point' and nothing more could be offered in the way of affordable housing, but then stunned everyone but themselves  with the admission that it was only paying £260,000 towards the extra 42 social rented units (lifting the number from 74 to 116 units) the rest of the cost being met by a GLA affordable housing grant of £11.25m, thus maintaining Delancey's estimated profit at £147m.  This equates to about 15% GDV (gross development value) or 1.5% pa according, to Delancey.

The committee rests its hopes of improving the affordable housing through a so called viability reveiw mechanism, which at some later date will establish the acheived level of profit.  Southwark's viability advisor's, GVA (link) endorsed this approach, saying that it would be an open-book appraisal, with all the figures being made available, but given that Delancey are even now keeping critical information confidential (link) and Delancey's off-shore company structure (link) one can be forgiven for doubting this.

## Fortune favours UAL 

The partnership with University of the Arts London (UAL) undoubtedly helped turn at least one committee member's vote Delancey's way, through fear of the LCC upping sticks were the application rejected and UAL will be rewarded with a new London College of Communication campus.  We know from staff and students that new facilities are much-needed and no-one wishes to see the LCC lost to the Elephant or Southwark, where they do much worthy educational work, but the fact remains that UAL are the only current occupants of the Elephant who will undoubtedly benefit from this new development, which will thrust most of the rest out.  Much will rest on the final terms of the S106 agreement and UAL should use all its influence with Delancey, on behalf of those who won't enjoy UAL's good fortune.

## It will not be plain sailing from Delancey

Seven [councillors statement](https://pbs.twimg.com/media/DhNo_cvWAAEiH2w.jpg) including the local ward councillors and the deputy leader have made their dissatisfaction with the decision clear and asked for SK to make improvements, although how they don't say.  SK has wide pwoers and on an application such as this can eithdirect refusal or take the decision into his own hands.  He has 14 days to do this from the date of the planning committee (https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/planning/planning-applications-and-decisions/what-powers-does-mayor-have-planning
Ashomi

Unfortunately by not guaranteeing this before they gave D planning approval S had made it a lot harder to achieve. S kept insisting that it is not the end of the road, because the planning approval is not final until the S106 agreement is concluded and we can count on them to remedy...but these are the same officers who insisted that the scheme could only viably support 33 social rented units a number which is only now 116, by what ever faulty means, after local councillors, traders and campaigners defeated their recommendation first time round.

SK can call in and seeing the way his pet housing tenure LLR has been trashed by D seems no reason why he shouldn't, although his GLA officers have been largely supportive, with reservations about treatment of traders (link).  SK has said that 

Local campaigners and centre traders are also gearing up for the next stage of the battle.

How Southwark negotiates the s106 agreement will 


Changes in committee - as noted along with much else, in exemplary SE1 twitter feed

fficers at pains to say only a resolution to approve (with conditions) was passed and that the app
Campaigner's reactions.

Shopping centre planning application has laid bare the basic premise of regeneration in London - if you live or work on land that 

The choice before the planning committee was therefore made very clear - the proposal would undoubtedly improve the local infrastruture that improves the local infrastructure undoubtedly gains the was

https://twitter.com/UpTheElephant
https://twitter.com/UpTheElephant_/status/1014481012007620611
https://twitter.com/LatinElephant
https://twitter.com/LatinElephant/status/1014486589194555393
https://twitter.com/FaradayLabour
https://twitter.com/FaradayLabour/status/1014968384579080197
https://twitter.com/FloEshalomi/status/1014829701788045320
https://twitter.com/UpTheElephant_/status/1014481012007620611 Councillor's statement
https://twitter.com/rebeccalury/status/1014269784559669248




Enter text in [Markdown](http://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown/). Use the toolbar above, or click the **?** button for formatting help.
